1. Definition of State Space and Justification

Definition: The state space should represent all the details relevant to the problem about the environment at a particular instant. In the light of this definition, the state for this scenario may incorporate the following:

Positions of All Objects: The x and y coordinates of every object in the container. You have 18 objects, so you'll have 18 pairs of positions.
Position of the container: x and y position of the container itself in the environment to help track its movements and, if any, its effect on object distribution.

Justification:
The agent needs all object positions in order to comprehend the current arrangement of objects inside the container.
Container position may enable the agent to estimate how its actions are affecting the objects relative positions.
Only x, y coordinates are captured, and only the motion is considered within a 2D plane.

2. Definition and Justification of Action Space

Definition: Action space can be defined as four possible actions:

Move container Up
Move container Down
Move container Left
Move container Right

Justification:
These four directions are simple and sufficient to shake or tilt the container in order to mix the items inside.
Limiting the actions to just these four reduces the action space so that possible moves can be explored more reasonably without overwhelming the agent.
Each of the actions significantly influences the motion of the object, hence, the combinations that will be explored by an agent will likely be the ones which give the best mixes.

3. Reward Function and Justification

Definition: In this problem, the designed reward function should incentivize the agent to arrive at a uniform mix of objects. A possible design could be the following:

Mixing Reward: Provide a reward as a function of distance between objects of two different colours. The lower the average distance between blue and red objects, the better the mixing.
Negative Clustering Reward: Penalize slightly at any time when objects of the same colour cluster up by the definition of a distance.
Completion Reward: If objects are well-distributed-e.g., the average distance between different colors meets a target threshold-issue a larger reward to indicate a successful mix.

Justification:
This proximity reward will encourage the agent to try to minimize its distance between differently colored objects; to mix them.
The penalty discourages same-color objects from gathering together; the result of not mixing.
This reward for completion will incentivize the agent in reaching and sustaining an optimal mix, guiding it toward the final objective.